# Intro to Programming

## Computer

What is a computer?
Computer is a machine that processes instructions and return its results. either render it on screen or store it in hard drive or making network requests to another computer.

Computer use memory to store instructions. Instruction in memory can be referenced by address.

Computer can only understand bytecode. a byte is a set of bit (8 bit). bit value is only 1 or 0 which represet high or low electric voltage respectively.

Every instructions and values is stored in bytes.

How to understand a byte

```
Bytes         =>  1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1

Calculations  =>  2^7+2^6+2^5+2^4+2^3+2^2+2^1+2^0

Result        =>  128+64 +32 +16 +8  +4  +2  +1   = 255
```

## Examples

Sample Conversion of decimal to byte

```
1 = 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
2 = 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
3 = 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1
```

for example an instruction to calculate (2 + 2) and store value in an address:

States Memory

```
A = 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
B = 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
C = A + B
```

Computation

```
Load A
Load B
Do Operation A OR B
            1
  0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
  0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
  --------------- +
  0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 = 4
Store Result at C
```

### Excercise

[TODO]

## Programming Language

A language that was invented to bridge between human language and computer bytecode.

Developer can give instruction to computer in human readable language.

There many types of programming language that was invented until now, start from the primitive language like assembly to high level language such as Javascript.

High level language more understadable to human than primitive language.

Programming language cannot directly give instructions to computer. but rather it needs tools such as compiler or interpreter to convert from a programming language to computer bytecode.

Samples of programming language:

- Assembly
- Web Assembly
- C/C++
- Java
- Golang
- Javascript
- Python

a set of instructions written in a programming language is called a script.

Samples of scripts

- hello.java
- hello.c
- hello.js
- hello.py

### Examples

an instruction in javascript for computer to calculate (2 + 2) and print the result

```
var a = 2;
var b = 2;

console.log(2 + 2)
```

an instruction in javascript for computer to print 1 to 10

```
for(var i=1; i<=10; i++) {
  console.log(i)
}
```

### Excercise

[TODO]

## Interpreter & Compiler

Programming language use certain tool for converting instructions to computer bytecode.

There are two kinds of tools. First is a compiler and second is Interpreter.

Compiler convert programming script to bytecode in build time.

Interpreter convert programming script to bytecode during runtime.

Samples of Compiler

- Javac
- go
- gcc
- scalac

Samples of Interpreter

- V8 Runtime
- PHP Runtime
- Python Runtime

### Excercise

[TODO]

## What is Javascript?

Javascript is a high level programming language. Its easier to read compare to more primitive language.

it use interpreter to convert script to bytecode during runtime.

it can run both in browser or server

it can only use single thread for its execution.

every instruction in javascript is queued and executed in an event loop.

event loop allow javascript to be non-blocking when waiting for io response.

there are also limited concept of thread in javascript. its implementation is different between browser and server.

everything in javascript is object including primitive types such as number, boolean, string. functions is also an object.

developer can treat functions as "types".

functions is a first class citizen. it can be passed as paramaters or returned as a result of another function.

functions is assignable to variables.

javascript is a typesafe language. every variables assignment and cleanup is handled by the runtime.

javascript use garbage collector to release unreferenced memory block.
